content/article/2018-10-06-there-are-only-temporary-solutions.md, before:

---
title: "There Are Only Temporary Solutions"
date: 2018-09-06T20:14:58+02:00
url: "there-are-only-temporary-solutions"
categories: ["Thoughts"]
tags: []
---

<figure class="image-border" style="margin-top: 2em">
  <img src="../images/rawpixel-749480-unsplash-w1500.jpg" alt="Women with post it notes in wall">
    <figcaption>
      <p>Photo by <a href="https://unsplash.com/photos/KFIjzXYg1RM">Jeremy Bishop</a> on <a href="https://unsplash.com/">Unsplash</a></p>
    </figcaption>    
</figure>

This is a reflection from an earlier job I had. It was at one of those large enterprises with monthly deploys and a development process documentation taking up 5 meters on a wall.

For 8 years, consultants from one of the largest IT companies, had failed to deliver a company-wide identity solution (authentication/authorisation) that fulfilled the requirements. It was emphasised how important is was that this was done _right_ (opposite to _[fail fast][1]_). This became more and more frustrating, as it was holding back many other initiatives that needed a unified user management solution. So, one day two of our team members had enough and spent a sprint on investigating an alternative solution. 

A solution was presented that would take a few weeks to implement. With a lot of scepticism, we got an approval to go ahead with this alternative solution under the condition that it should only be considered a _temporary_ solution. This was emphasised a lot, a _temporary_ solution. 

It got me thinking: as opposed to what? 🤨 A _permanent_ solution? 😲 A permanent software solution? 🤣 Seriously?

> There are only temporary software solutions!

There are only temporary software solutions! Or rather, solutions that will be used until they are replaced with something else. I guess it might make sense to talk about _temporary solutions_ when we have a plan to replace it, with _what_ and by _when_. In other words, a [deliberate technical debt][2].

Next time a colleague talks about a _temporary solution_, I will be better prepared to challenge him or her with what he/she actually mean.



[1]: https://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/fail-fast
[2]: https://hackernoon.com/there-are-3-main-types-of-technical-debt-heres-how-to-manage-them-4a3328a4c50c

Commit message:

Updated summary for temporary solutions post

content/article/2018-10-06-there-are-only-temporary-solutions.md, after:

---
title: "There Are Only Temporary Solutions"
date: 2018-09-06T20:14:58+02:00
url: "there-are-only-temporary-solutions"
categories: ["Thoughts"]
tags: []
summary: "This is a reflection from an earlier job I had. It was at one of those large enterprises with monthly deploys and a development process documentation taking up 5 meters on a wall. For 8 years, consultants from one of the largest IT companies, had failed to deliver a company-wide..."
---

<figure class="image-border" style="margin-top: 2em">
  <img src="../images/rawpixel-749480-unsplash-w1500.jpg" alt="Women with post it notes in wall">
    <figcaption>
      <p>Photo by <a href="https://unsplash.com/photos/KFIjzXYg1RM">Jeremy Bishop</a> on <a href="https://unsplash.com/">Unsplash</a></p>
    </figcaption>    
</figure>

This is a reflection from an earlier job I had. It was at one of those large enterprises with monthly deploys and a development process documentation taking up 5 meters on a wall.

For 8 years, consultants from one of the largest IT companies, had failed to deliver a company-wide identity solution (authentication/authorisation) that fulfilled the requirements. It was emphasised how important is was that this was done _right_ (opposite to _[fail fast][1]_). This became more and more frustrating, as it was holding back many other initiatives that needed a unified user management solution. So, one day two of our team members had enough and spent a sprint on investigating an alternative solution. 

A solution was presented that would take a few weeks to implement. With a lot of scepticism, we got an approval to go ahead with this alternative solution under the condition that it should only be considered a _temporary_ solution. This was emphasised a lot, a _temporary_ solution. 

It got me thinking: as opposed to what? 🤨 A _permanent_ solution? 😲 A permanent software solution? 🤣 Seriously?

> There are only temporary software solutions!

There are only temporary software solutions! Or rather, solutions that will be used until they are replaced with something else. I guess it might make sense to talk about _temporary solutions_ when we have a plan to replace it, with _what_ and by _when_. In other words, a [deliberate technical debt][2].

Next time a colleague talks about a _temporary solution_, I will be better prepared to challenge him or her with what he/she actually mean.



[1]: https://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/fail-fast
[2]: https://hackernoon.com/there-are-3-main-types-of-technical-debt-heres-how-to-manage-them-4a3328a4c50c
